Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:Author:       Manuel Pichler
:Copyright:    All rights reserved
:Description:  This document describes the configuration component of
               PHP_Depend. The configuration system allows to customize
               several aspects of PHP_Depend through a simple xml file.
:Keywords:     Configuration, XML, XML-Schema, PHP_Depend, Command-Line

Newer versions of PHP_Depend provide a flexible and easy to use configuration
file. This file can be used to tune several aspects of PHP_Depend, that were
normally hard and complicated to configure with pure command line options.

Base configuration file
=======================

The minimum configuration file consists of a simple root element without
any child elements or attributes, because all settings are optional. ::

  <?xml version="1.0" ?>
  <configuration />
  
In most cases you will also specify the `XML schema`__ for the configuration 
file in order to get automatic validation and auto-completion in your 
development environment. ::

  <?xml version="1.0" ?>
  <configuration
      xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
      xmlns="http://pdepend.org/schema/configuration"
      xsi:schemaLocation="http://pdepend.org/schema/configuration
                          http://pdepend.org/schema/1.0/configuration.xsd" />

Elements
========

imageConvert
------------

The ``<imageConvert>`` element is a container for all configuration settings
available for the image convert component. It is used by PHP_Depend to render
the different graphical reports like the `Overview Pyramid`__ or the the 
*Abstraction & Instabilit* chart. ::

  <?xml version="1.0" ?>
  <configuration ...>
      <imageConvert>
          <fontFamily>Luxi Sans</fontFamily>
          <fontSize>42</fontSize>
      </imageConvert>
  </configuration>
  
At the moment you can only customize the font-size and the font-family that
were used in the generated graphics.

fontFamily
``````````

The ``<fontFamily>`` element can be used to specify a custom font-family that
should be used for all text elements rendered by PHP_Depend. This element
accepts any valid font-family identifier, as they are used to specify a
font-family in a css- or svg-file. ::

  <imageConvert>
      <fontFamily>Luxi Sans</fontFamily>
  </imageConvert>
  
Or you can specify a list of font-families: ::

  <imageConvert>
      <fontFamily>Luxi Sans, Verdana, sans-serif</fontFamily>
  </imageConvert>

fontSize
````````

The ``<fontSize>`` element can be used to specify a new base font-size for all 
charts generated by PHP_Depend. This base font-size will be used by the image
convert component to recalculate all font sizes used within a chart. This 
element only accepts data of type *int*. ::

  <imageConvert>
      <fontSize>42</fontSize>
  </imageConvert>

cache
-----

Within the ``<cache>`` container element you can configure the cache backend
that will be used by PHP_Depend. The used cache backend can have a great
impact on PHP_Depend's overall performance, memory consumption and diskspace
usage. While the file based cache promises a better performance on consecutive
calls, it can require a large amount of diskspace. In contrast, the memory
based cache doesn't allocate any diskspace, but it normally requires muc
more memory and it forces the PHP_Depend to parse the whole source on every
call. ::

  <?xml version="1.0" ?>
  <configuration ...>
      <cache>
          <driver>file</driver>
          <location>/var/run/pdepend</location>
      </cache>
  </configuration>

driver
``````

The ``<driver>`` element can be used to define the cache backend for
PHP_Depend. At the moment this element only accepts two predefined values
as content:

- ``file``
- ``memory``

The cache driver must be specified as cdata of the ``<driver>`` element. ::

  <cache>
      <driver>file</driver>
  </cache>

The default driver used by PHP_Depend is ``file``. 

location
````````

The ``<location>`` element can be used to define a custom location for the
cache files generated by PHP_Depend. As this statement already implies, the 
``<location>`` element is only used by the file system based cache and will
be ignored for the memory driver. ::

  <cache>
      <location>/tmp/pdepend/cache</location>
  </cache>

The default cache location under linux/unix systems is ``$HOME + "/.pdepend"`` 
and under windows ``$HOMEDRIVE + $HOMEPATH + "/.pdepend"``.

Using the configuration file
============================

There are two ways how the PHP_Depend configuration file can be specified.
The first style is to declare the configuration file explicit, by using the
command line option ``--configuration``. 

.. class:: shell

::

  ~ $ pdepend --configuration=my.config.xml
  
The second style/concept to specify PHP_Depend's configuration file was 
adapted from `PHPUnit`__, where you can put an xml file named after the 
tool(so ``phpunit.xml`` in the case of PHPUnit and ``pdepend.xml`` in the
case of PHP_Depend) into the current working directory. This file will
then be read and parsed automatically by PHP_Depend.

.. class:: shell

::

  ~ $ ls -l
  drwxrwxr-x  8 4096 Nov 24 11:05 build
  drwxrwxr-x  8 4096 Nov 24 11:05 src
  -rwxr--r--  1  806 Oct 19 15:07 pdepend.xml
  ~ $ pdepend --jdepend-xml=build/logs/jdepend.xml src

In this case PHP_Depend parse the configuration settings defined in the 
```pdepend.xml`` file, right before it starts to parse the source.

Beside this configuration file you can also put a second file named 
``pdepend.xml.dist`` into the current working directory. The purpose of
the ``*.dist`` is to provide a project with factory settings for PHP_Depend,
while the ``*.xml`` is reserved for modifications in each checkout. 

PHP_Depend reads both configuration files additive. This means it first
reads the ``pdepend.xml.dist`` and overwrites the default values with those
found in the xml file. Then it reads the ``pdepend.xml`` file and only
overwrites those settings that were defined in this file.
overwrites those settings that were defined in this file.

History
=======

The command line option to specify a xml configuration file already exists
for a long time in PHP_Depend, but the configuration file wasn't really in
use until version 0.10.0. Since this release we have started to provide an
`XML-Schema`__ for the configuration fike and we moved several command line
options or previously hard-coded-switches into the xml configuration file.

__ http://pdepend.org/schema/1.0/configuration.xsd
__ /documentation/handbook/reports/overview-pyramid.html
__ http://www.phpunit.de/manual/3.5/en/index.html
__ http://pdepend.org/schema/1.0/configuration.xsd

.. class:: prev

`Command Line`__

.. class:: next

`Reports`__

__ /documentation/handbook/command-line.html
__ /documentation/handbook/reports.html
